## Daniel A Allard Resume (Long)

1220 North Gilmax Ln

Poulsbo, WA 98370

Work/Cell (360) 535 1429

### Objective

Architecture, engineering, design, development, testing of ground data system software for a variety of mission projects.  Improve overall state of the art for flight mission operations.  

Summary
Senior engineer, architect and development lead of critical mission software systems. 

### Education 

B.S. Engineering Physics, 1991
Tufts University, Medford MA

JPL and USC classes on software architecture, engineering and design. 

Computer Skills

### Capabilities

As developer, lead developer, engineer, and system architect, capable of performing the following: proposing and winning work, long and short-range project planning, managing staff, managing projects, requirements, architecture, design, testing, test plans, software delivery management…  Capabilities applied for the following projects:

### Software

Python, Java, C, Motif, Perl, Java RMI, Java JNI, Oracle PL/SQL, Unix, HTML, Eclipse Plug-In, RCP, SWT, Javascript, Ruby, Ruby on Rails

### Hardware

Linux, Mac, Sun Workstation, HP Workstation, PC/Windows

### Experience 

Senior member of technical staff, Jet Propulsion Laboratory 1991 – 2025

**AMMOS Web Developer (Jan 2025-Oct 2025)**

Developing AMMOS public facing software catalog page.  Responsible for all development activities, website design and deployment.

Performing an accessibility audit of the Aerie simulation software suite and implementing some improvements. 

**Europa Clipper Planning and Execution Software System (PESS) Deputy (2021-2024)**

System engineering support for the PESS subsystem.  Provided direction for design and architecture efforts, generally related to integration of different elements of the planning system.  Flight Rule Cog-E for two years, responsible for triage and assignment for flight rules for implementation.  

**Europa Clipper Flight System Performance Analysis (FSPA) Cognizant System Engineer (2018 – 2024)**

Planning, scheduling, costing, and otherwise managing the work effort for ~6-8 developers to implement the Europa Clipper FSPA ground data system component.  Presents at reviews including PDR and MMRs.  Managed all FSPA software deliveries (3/year) through the recent delivery targeted for launch operations. 

**Operations for Autonomy Research Task Engineer (2019-2022)**

Provided guidance for ‘Operations for Autonomy’ research task representing the downlink perspective.  Designed and developed most of the telemetry downlink system within the flight system simulator.  Provided findings for the research paper results.  

**Mars Relay Operations Service (MaROS) Developer/Lead Developer (2009-2018) and System Engineer (2018 – 2025)**

Developer for MaROS since inception, took over as lead developer in 2011.  Provided architectural descriptions, detailed design, release documentation.  Performed development, testing, task management, and substantial operational support.  Supported integration of new missions like Mars Express and MAVEN.  Primary integration lead for TGO.  Currently supporting as a system engineer, primarily as a designer and development mentor.  

**Mars Science Laboratory EDL Analysis Software (‘Slopes’) Lead Developer (2017 – 2020)**

Software development, engineering, design, testing, analysis, releases for the Slopes tool, a critical service used by the Mars 2020 EDL team to analyze EDL simulations in development, testbed, and ATLO venues. 

**Mars Science Laboratory Engineering Analysis Subsystem (EAS) Task Manager/ Cognizant System Engineer (2015 – 2017)**

Performed all long term and near-term scheduling for the Mars 2020 Engineering Analysis Subsystem (EAS) for a team of 6-8 developers.  Was responsible for all L4 and L5 requirements.  Provided design, interface, MMR, etc. documentation.  Presented at project PDR and CDRs.

**Mission Web Control Services (MCWS) Cognizant Engineer (2014 – 2016)**

Led development of the MGSS tool MCWS, a web-accessible query server framework for telemetry data generated by AMPCS.  
	
**Soil Moisture Active/Passive (SMAP) Mission Data Management and Parameter Tracking Tools Cognizant Engineer (2014 - 2015)**

Led development of an onboard memory parameter state tracking tool (PMT) and Data Management Tools (DMT) for SMAP, as derived from an MSL baselines.

**Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) Parameter Tracking Tools Developer/Lead Developer (2009 - 2018)**

Developed an onboard memory parameter state tracking tool (PMT) for MSL and took over development lead in 2011.  Responsible for deliveries through late calendar 2018. 

**Relay Data Engineering Tool Lead Developer (2008-2010)**

Developed a software tool to track relay statistics (e.g. downlinked data volumes) during the Phoenix mission campaign. 

Designed, developed, managed and delivered several versions of the Mars Science Laboratory Data Management Tool (DMT), responsible for automated retransmission and deletion of onboard data, as well as managing re-prioritization and general use for data analysis.  

**Accountability Service Core Developer (2006 - 2010)**

Technical lead and software architect of the Accountability Service Core (ASC).  Supporting integration of ASC with DSN and MRO to enable MRO downlink frame accountability.  Managing adaptation of ASC to support a Relay Data Engineering (RDE) upgrade, developing RDE information model.  Working with end-to-end and project data accountability efforts in requirements, engineering and design.  Designing prototype accountability system and information model for MSL. 

**Mission Data Processing and Control Subsystem (MPCS) Lead Developer (2005 - 2007)**

Performed design and development of the MPCS subsystem.  Developed uplink and downlink software components as well as monitor tools.  Performed re-factor of channel processing system (formerly the AGDS Extended Channel Processor) along the lines of an extendable, hierarchical data model enabling significant evolutionary progress in channel processing capabilities.  Developed and performed MPCS software demonstration for a range of end-users and manager level customers.  

**Interplanetary Information Services (IIS) R&TD Task (2004 – 2005)**

Evaluated impact of a distributed object communications architecture on space link communications and applicability to complex space science activities.  Developed SMD science scenario based off of the Mars NetLanders project, developed activity-based information model supporting distributed science communications. Developed demonstration software framework and performed end-to-end demonstration. Developed further Constellation activity scenarios and core supporting information model components.  Produced final report detailing an object-based, information model-driven communications architecture with benefits and impacts for DISA and Constellation. 

**Interplanetary Communications Network Infrastructure (ICNI) IND Task (2004 – 2005)**

Integrated SharedNet distributed object communications system with MACHETE space link simulation software.  Developed and evaluated complex communications scenarios in a ‘disjoint’ space link environment. 

**High Dependability Computing Program (2004)**

Evaluated Real-Time Java in the context of modern flight software systems.  Developed a model of system dependability, developed analysis software and performed analysis of a set of Real-Time Java systems.  Published evaluation findings in IEEE software magazine. 

**Golden Gate Real-Time Java Analysis (2004)**

Evaluated characteristics of a set of Real-Time Java systems.  Developed analysis software and performed analysis.  Provided data demonstrating value of “spheres” real-time communication abstraction. 

**SharedNet Software Development (2001 – 2004)**

Java development of the SharedNet distributed object management communications system.  Designed and developed SharedNet administration tools and test drivers; designed an automated test suite for all SharedNet testing, led development effort of test suite.  On-site support of SharedNet integration testing (SPAWAR, etc.)  Led the SharedNet 6.5.3.1 integration test effort.  Evaluated usability and impacts of deployed information models in the real-time operational environment.  

**MSAS Team Lead (1997 - 2001)**

Performed management tasks for half of the Multi-mission Software Analysis System (MSAS) development team and a wide range of engineering, design and coding tasks. MSAS was developed for the Cassini spacecraft operations team for real-time monitoring and analysis of spacecraft state/telemetry, and was delivered to missions including DS1 and SIRTF. Led the MSAS design and development effort to upgrade MSAS software using the Java programming language, responsible for the design of much of the new Java-based MSAS system.  Developed Java interface to native C code libraries using Java JNI (Java Native Interface) language and developed client-server interface with the MSAS data processing server using Java RMI (Remote Method Invocation) libraries.  Developed many of the MSAS Java data retrieval and real-time telemetry monitoring tools including support libraries and interfaces. Supervised the Y2K certification of MSAS including management of code review and testing.

**MSAS Software Development (1995-1997)**

C/Motif development of MSAS tools, including: Data Dictionary editor, Analysis Environment front end tool for Matlab product, plus other library and MSAS tool support.  Designed and managed development of telemetry data database manager interfacing C/Motif and Oracle PL/SQL.  Design support for a number of MSAS tasks.

**NOCC Software Development (1991 – 1995)**

Development of real-time monitoring software for Deep Space Network; development of C/Motif tools including real-time displays and plots; development of a display compiler using YACC/LEX; development of NOCC support utilities and libraries.

#### Publications With Links

“Evaluating COTS Component Dependability in Context”, IEEE Software July/August 2005

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1463207/

“Mars Relay Operations Service (MaROS): Managing Strategic and Tactical Relay for the Evolving Mars Network”, IEEE Montana Conference 2012

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6187115?denied=

“Adaptation of the Agile Scrum Methodology for the Implementation of Multi-Mission Relay Coordination Software”, INCOSE Mini-Conference 2013

https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20150007147

“Ground Data System Analysis Tools to Track Flight System State Parameters for the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) and Beyond”, AIAA Conference Pasadena, CA 2014

https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/10.2514/6.2014-1741

“Operations for Autonomous Spacecraft”, IEEE Aerospace Conference 2021

https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.10970

“Operations for Autonomous Spacecraft”, IEEE Aerospace Conference 2022

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9843352

“Workflows. User Interfaces, and Algorithms for Operations of Autonomous Spacecraft”, IEEE 2023

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10115605

“Communications Across Complex Space Networks”, IEEE Montana Conference 2008 

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/4526323

“Development of a Ground Data Messaging Infrastructure for the Mars Science Laboratory and Beyond”, IEEE Montana Conference 2007

“Implementation of a Relay Coordination System for the Mars Network”, IEEE Montana Conference 2010

“Strategic Planning and Coordination Interfaces for the Mars Relay Operations Service (MaROS)”, IEEE Montana Conference 2010 



